.TH CMC 1 "2026-06-13" "cmc 1.0.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
cmc \- Copy Multiple Contents \- collect file contents for LLM context
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cmc
[OPTIONS] [PATHS...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cmc
collects the contents of multiple files and outputs them to stdout, a file,
or the system clipboard in one command. It is purpose-built for preparing
source code and project context for Large Language Models (LLMs).

If no selection patterns are given, all discovered files are included
(subject to exclusions). Arguments are parsed left-to-right: before the
first
.B \-e
or
.B \-E
option, positional arguments are selection patterns; after, they are
exclusion patterns.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-R ", " \-\-recursive
Recursively scan directories.
.TP
.BR \-e ", " \-\-exclude " \fIpattern\fP"
Exclude files matching a POSIX glob pattern. All subsequent positional
arguments are treated as exclusion patterns.
.TP
.BR \-E ", " \-\-excludes " \fIpattern\fP"
Exclude files matching a glob pattern. Also loads exclusion patterns from
the user config file (see
.BR FILES " below)."
All subsequent positional arguments are treated as exclusion patterns.
.TP
.BR \-o ", " \-\-output " \fIfile\fP"
Write output to
.IR file .
The file is overwritten if it exists.
.TP
.BR \-c ", " \-\-clipboard
Copy output to the system clipboard. Uses
.B wl\-copy
on Wayland or
.B xclip
on X11. Detection is automatic.
.TP
.BR \-s ", " \-\-symlinks
Follow symbolic links. Without this flag, symlinks are skipped in all
scan modes (recursive, flat, and explicit paths).
.TP
.BR \-p ", " \-\-paths
Prepend each file with its path in a
.B "### FILE: \fIpath\fP ###"
header. A leading
.B ./
is stripped from the path.
.TP
.BR \-b ", " \-\-binary
Include binary files. By default, binary files are silently excluded
using libmagic MIME-type detection. Use with caution \(em binary content
will produce garbled output.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display help and exit.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Show version information and exit.
.PP
Long options that require an argument accept both
.B \-\-option=value
and
.B \-\-option value
syntax.
.PP
The special argument
.B \-\-
ends option parsing; all subsequent arguments are treated as positional
patterns (selection or exclusion depending on current mode).

.SH ARGUMENTS
.IP "Selection patterns" 4
Before the first
.BR \-e " or " \-E ,
all positional arguments are POSIX glob or literal paths. Only files
matching at least one pattern are included.
.IP "Exclusion patterns" 4
After
.BR \-e " or " \-E ,
all positional arguments are POSIX glob patterns. Matching files are
skipped.
.IP "No selection" 4
If no selection pattern is given, all discovered files are included
(except those matching exclusions or binary files).

.SH EXIT CODES
.TP
0
Success.
.TP
1
General error (I/O failure, memory allocation failure).
.TP
2
Invalid command line arguments, or
.B \-c
and
.B \-o
used together.
.TP
3
Output file error (cannot open or write to output file).
.TP
4
Clipboard tool not found (neither
.B wl\-copy
nor
.B xclip
available).
.TP
5
libmagic initialization error.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
If set and non-empty, the user exclusion config file is loaded from
.IR $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/cmc/.cmc_excludes .
.TP
.B HOME
Used as fallback when
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is not set: the config file is loaded from
.IR $HOME/.config/cmc/.cmc_excludes .

.SH FILES
.TP
.I $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/cmc/.cmc_excludes
or
.I $HOME/.config/cmc/.cmc_excludes
User exclusion patterns. One glob pattern per line; lines starting with
.B #
are comments. Loaded automatically when
.B \-E
or
.B \-\-excludes
is used. Created automatically by
.BR "make install" .
A sample file is provided in
.IR /usr/share/doc/cmc/cmc_excludes.example .

.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Basic usage
Print a single file to stdout:
.RS
.PP
cmc main.c
.RE
.TP
Multiple files
Concatenate files in lexicographic order:
.RS
.PP
cmc main.c helper.c config.h
.RE
.TP
Recursive scan with exclusions
Scan a project excluding build artifacts:
.RS
.PP
cmc \-R . \-e "*.o" "build/*" __pycache__/*
.RE
.TP
Clipboard with path labels
Copy entire project to clipboard with file headers:
.RS
.PP
cmc \-R src/ \-p \-c
.RE
.TP
File output with config exclusions
Write to a file, loading patterns from user config:
.RS
.PP
cmc \-R . \-E "*.md" \-p \-o context.txt
.RE
.TP
Pipe to LLM
Send source code to an LLM CLI tool:
.RS
.PP
cmc \-R src/ \-p | llm \-s "Explain the architecture"
.RE

.SH BUGS
Report bugs at
.UR https://github.com/\:ctrichet/\:cmc/\:issues
https://github.com/ctrichet/cmc/issues
.UE .

.SH AUTHOR
cmc contributors.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR cat (1),
.BR xclip (1),
.BR wl\-copy (1)
